# Docker containers

## dcm problem

While `dcm` noted the fail it was not surfaced in `playbash run all daily` output.
Failing to pull `vault` is understandable and it is not an error that should
interrupt the update, but it should be noted somehow in the summary.

The actual output:

```
Updating: vault
docker compose pull
[+] pull 0/1
 ⠹ Image vault-storage:latest Pulling                                                                                               0.3s
[+] pull 1/1ARNING: Some service image(s) must be built from source by running:
 ! Image v... pull access denied for vault-storage, repository does not exist or may require 'docker login': denied: requested access to the resource is denied 0.3s
Error response from daemon: pull access denied for vault-storage, repository does not exist or may require 'docker login': denied: requested access to the resource is denied
```

If it is not difficult, we should not even pull `vault`. One thing to explore (if it is difficult
to detect with certainty) is to add some metainformation to `compose.yaml` file explaining
details of how to handle it. In the same vein as `labels` section for `homepage` or even reusing it.

## Conventions

# Reboot notification

I used to have it at the end of `upd` and `cln` scripts. Not it is buried in a middle and when
I check the results of this scripts or scripts derived from it, e.g., `playbash-daily`, I don't
see it immediately. It should be repeated at the end.

It would be useful if we can show the need to reboot on a login to that computer, e.g.,
in `.bshrc` after `fastfetch`.

# Sections in updates

`upd`, `cln` and related scripts that do updates can do so in sections. For example:

- `apt` section
- `snap` section
- `flatpak` section
- `brew` section

Unfortunatley these sections can fail for reasons we do not control. Yet failing one section
should not prevent other sections to complete. Right now the first error terminates the script.
Most probably we should review and modify this behavior. Obviously, all failed sections should be
reported (using a sidecar?).

The same applies to `dcm`: certain services (`compose.yaml` declarations) can fail to update.
These failures should be reported. But other services should tried independently.
